4.4 Request Lifecycle (continued)

The request lifecycle after the admission check is:

Router selects a healthy worker

|

Request added to in-flight tracker

|

Master sends gRPC request

|

Worker performs RAG retrieval (elite tier only)

|

Worker calls Ollama

|

Worker returns response

|

Request removed from in-flight tracker

|

Latency recorded

|

Response returned to client


If no healthy worker is available, the router returns ErrNoWorkersAvailable. The master retries for a short window, triggers autoscaler scale-up, and finally returns a 503 if workers do not become available in time. This prevents requests from being silently dropped while still giving the system a chance to recover.

4.5 Worker Registration Lifecycle

Worker registration is a critical part of the system because the master must only route traffic to workers that are actually ready.

The lifecycle begins when an agent starts. The agent sends a registration request to the master. This request includes the agent ID, host, port, and any running workers the agent can detect. The master stores this information in its agent registry. If no workers were reported, the master sends a create request to the agent; if workers are reported, the master attempts to re-adopt them.

When the master or autoscaler requests a new worker, the agent creates a worker container using Docker. The agent immediately returns an acknowledgement and then waits for the worker gRPC port to become reachable. The worker is not considered routable at this stage; the master tracks a STARTING placeholder once it receives the create acknowledgement.

Once the port is reachable, the agent sends a callback to the master’s /workers/ready endpoint. The master then opens a gRPC connection and registers the worker as a live instance. Only after the gRPC connection succeeds does the worker become routable (HEALTHY after a warm-up ping). This design avoids premature routing to containers that have not fully started.

The lifecycle is:

Agent starts

|

Agent registers with master

|

Master stores agent

|

Master requests worker creation (if no surviving workers)

|

Agent creates Docker container

|

Worker marked STARTING (placeholder)

|

Agent waits for gRPC port

|

Agent sends ready callback

|

Master connects to worker (gRPC)

|

Worker becomes WARMING then HEALTHY


4.6 Autoscaling Lifecycle

The autoscaler runs inside the master. It periodically evaluates cluster metrics and decides whether to add or remove workers. Key signals include worker utilization, queue depth, in-flight requests, request rate, error rate, and latency. Scale-up and scale-down are intentionally conservative to avoid oscillation.

Scale-up happens when the queue builds or sustained load indicates insufficient capacity. When the router finds no workers, it can also trigger an immediate scale-up that bypasses cooldown. Scale-down happens only after a sustained quiet period and only when workers are idle. Workers are not removed immediately; they are drained first so active requests can finish.

Scale-up lifecycle:

Autoscaler tick or router trigger

|

Collect metrics

|

Detect queue or sustained load

|

Check cooldown (bypassed if zero workers)

|

Select agent (least workers, avoid penalized)

|

Request worker creation

|

Worker registers through callback


Scale-down lifecycle:

Autoscaler tick

|

Detect sustained low load (queue empty, inflight = 0)

|

Select least busy healthy workers

|

Mark worker as DRAINING

|

Wait for active requests to finish

|

Mark STOPPING and close gRPC

|

Remove worker from registry

|

Ask agent to destroy container


This lifecycle supports both performance and cost efficiency. The system can increase capacity when demand grows and reduce resource usage when demand is low.

4.7 Failure Handling Design

The system includes several mechanisms for handling failures.

The first mechanism is worker health checking. The master periodically sends Ping requests to workers that are healthy or warming and currently idle. If a worker fails to respond, it is marked DRAINING and removed from routing. This prevents the router from sending new requests to failed workers.

The second mechanism is request timeout handling. The master does not wait indefinitely for a worker response. If a worker becomes too slow or stops responding, the request fails with a controlled error instead of blocking forever.

The third mechanism is lifecycle-based routing. Workers are only considered routable when they are HEALTHY. STARTING, DRAINING, STOPPING, and DEAD workers are excluded from routing.

The fourth mechanism is autoscaler retry behavior. If worker creation fails, the autoscaler retries with exponential backoff and temporarily penalizes failing agents.

The fifth mechanism is graceful scale-down. Workers are drained before removal, reducing the chance of interrupting active requests.

Failure cases considered include:

- worker container starts but gRPC server is not ready,

- worker fails after registration,

- worker becomes slow or overloaded,

- agent fails to create a worker,

- no workers are available,

- request times out,

- worker is removed during scale-down.

There are still limitations. The master stores worker state and in-flight request state in memory. If the master crashes during a request, the current implementation may lose that request state. A production-grade version would require persistent queues, replicated masters, and durable request tracking.

4.8 Architecture Diagram

(Diagram omitted in this text build.)

5. Load Balancing and Scheduling Design

5.1 Routing Problem Definition

The routing problem in this system is to assign each incoming request to a worker that can process it quickly. This decision sits on the path of request handling, so the router must make a choice with low overhead while still considering worker health and current load. In practice, a worker is considered routable only if it is healthy and has not exceeded the configured concurrency threshold. This prevents the master from forwarding work to unavailable or saturated workers.

Routing is more challenging for LLM workloads than for traditional web traffic because requests are not uniform. Some prompts are short and finish quickly, while others involve retrieval, long context windows, or extended token generation, which increases compute time significantly. If the router ignores this variability, one worker can become overloaded with expensive requests while others remain underused. Therefore, the design aims to balance three goals at once: fast decision making, fair distribution of work, and protection against overload.

Routing Requirement

Why It Matters

Low-latency decision

The master must choose a worker immediately so routing does not become a bottleneck itself.

Health awareness

Unhealthy or draining workers should not receive new traffic, which improves reliability.

Load awareness

Workers with too many active requests should be avoided to reduce queueing delay and timeouts.

Fairness

Requests should be spread across available workers so cluster resources are used efficiently.

5.2 Implemented Strategies

The router supports several strategies. The two relevant choices used in this project are least connections and round robin; a random strategy also exists for testing.

Strategy

How It Works

Best Use Case

Strength

Weakness

Least Connections

Selects the healthy worker with the smallest number of active requests.

Variable-duration inference tasks where request cost differs significantly.

Adapts dynamically to uneven workloads and helps prevent hot spots.

Depends on accurate tracking of active requests and does not directly measure latency.

Round Robin

Cycles through healthy workers in a fixed sequence and assigns each new request to the next worker.

Uniform workloads where requests take roughly the same time.

Very simple, predictable, and fair in balanced environments.

Can overload a worker if one assigned request takes much longer than others.

Random

Chooses a healthy worker at random.

Quick baseline for testing and fallback behavior.

Low overhead and simple to implement.

Ignores differences in current load.

The default router behavior uses least connections because it better reflects actual pressure on the cluster. Inference requests can vary widely in prompt length, retrieval cost, and generation length, so counting active work is a more useful signal than simply rotating evenly. The implementation scans all workers, skips any worker that is not routable, and chooses the one with the minimum active request count. It also applies a hard guardrail by rejecting routing if the chosen worker has already reached the configured concurrency ceiling, which helps avoid runaway overload.

5.3 Admission Control

Admission control complements routing by deciding whether the system should accept more work at all. Even the best routing algorithm cannot help if every healthy worker is already busy. The master estimates total safe capacity based on the number of healthy workers multiplied by the per-worker concurrency limit. Requests beyond that capacity are placed in a bounded queue, giving the system a short buffer during traffic bursts without allowing memory usage or waiting time to grow without limit.

Parameter

Default Value

Purpose

Effect on the System

MaxConcurrencyPerWorker

50

Caps the number of simultaneous requests a healthy worker may process.

Protects individual workers from excessive parallelism and high latency.

MaxQueueSize

500

Limits how many requests may wait when all workers are busy.

Prevents unbounded queue growth and memory pressure during bursts.

QueueTimeout

30 seconds

Sets the maximum time a request may remain queued.

Ensures clients receive a timely overload response instead of waiting indefinitely.

This design improves resilience under heavy load. Instead of silently degrading until response times become unacceptable, the system sheds excess load in a controlled and transparent way. That behavior is especially important for interactive AI systems, because users benefit more from a clear overload message than from an extremely delayed or failed response after a long wait.

5.4 Priority Handling

Priority handling introduces a lightweight quality-of-service mechanism inside the worker. Requests are placed into an in-memory priority queue where elite users receive the highest priority, then pro, then free. Because lower numeric values are processed first, elite requests are served ahead of pro and free requests whenever multiple requests are waiting at the same time.

User Tier

Numeric Priority

Scheduling Effect

Elite

1

Processed first when competing with lower-priority queued requests.

Pro

2

Processed after elite but before free traffic.

Free

3

Processed last when competing with higher-priority queued requests.

5.5 Dynamic Strategy Selection Under Load

The coursework also considered several strategy extensions that are not yet enabled in the main router but are valuable for future improvement. These strategies would make the load balancer more adaptive to real-time system behavior, user identity, or session locality. They are especially useful if the cluster grows larger or if the workload becomes more heterogeneous over time.

Future Strategy

Core Idea

Potential Benefit

Random Routing

Selects a healthy worker at random.

Very low overhead and useful as a simple baseline for testing.

Least Response Time

Routes to the worker with the best recent latency measurements.

Avoids persistently slow workers and adapts to performance degradation.

Consistent Hashing

Maps related sessions or users to the same worker when possible.

Improves cache locality and session affinity for repeated requests.

Priority Routing

Applies user-tier decisions at the router before requests reach workers.

Provides stronger end-to-end quality-of-service guarantees across the cluster.

Among these options, least response time and priority-aware routing are the most practical next steps for this project. The first would let the system react to observed performance rather than only active request counts, while the second would move service differentiation earlier in the processing pipeline. Together, they would make the scheduling layer smarter, more responsive, and better aligned with real production-style requirements.

6. Implementation Details

6.1 Technology Stack

Layer

Technology

Reason

Master

Go

Strong concurrency model, simple HTTP server, good gRPC support.

Worker

Python

Convenient model/RAG integration and fast prototyping.

Internal RPC

gRPC / Protocol Buffers

Typed, efficient, persistent communication for the hot path.

Inference

Ollama

Local LLM runtime with HTTP API and model selection through environment variables.

RAG

ChromaDB

Vector database service for storing and retrieving document chunks.

Deployment

Docker

Workers can be created, labeled, restarted, and removed by agents.

Monitoring

Bubble Tea TUI and metrics collector

Live view of cluster behavior and autoscaler decisions.

6.2 Master Node Implementation

The Master node is the central coordinator of the entire system. It is implemented in Go and is responsible for receiving client requests, selecting workers, forwarding requests to workers, tracking request state, monitoring worker health, and managing autoscaling.

The Master starts from master/main.go. In this file, the system creates a router using:

router := lib.NewRouter()

The router is the main in-memory structure that stores the current cluster state. After creating the router, the Master starts the HTTP server using:

go lib.Serve(router)

Then it starts the terminal dashboard using:

tui.Run(router)

This means the Master runs two major parts at the same time:

The HTTP server that receives API requests.

The TUI dashboard that shows live cluster status.

The main HTTP server implementation is in master/lib/server.go. The Master exposes endpoints such as /chat, /agents/register, and /workers/ready.

The most important endpoint is /chat. When a client sends a chat request, the Master performs the following steps:

Validates that the request method is POST.

Parses the JSON request body into a ChatRequest.

Records the request in the metrics collector.

Applies admission control to avoid accepting too many requests during overload.

Generates a unique request ID using UUID.

Sends the request to the router.

Returns the worker response to the client.

The request format is represented by this Go struct:

type ChatRequest struct {

    UserID string `json:"userId"`

    Prompt string `json:"prompt"`

    Tier   string `json:"tier"`

}

The response is represented as:

type ChatResponse struct {

    RequestID string `json:"requestId"`

    Reply     string `json:"reply"`

}

The actual routing happens in master/lib/router.go. The router stores workers in a map:

workers map[string]*Worker

It also stores registered agents:

agents map[string]*AgentInfo

This allows the Master to know which workers are available and which agent owns each worker.

The Master supports multiple worker selection strategies. In master/lib/strategy.go, three strategies are defined:

StrategyRoundRobin

StrategyLeastConnections

StrategyRandom
